WIP  // SUBJECT TO CHANGE // VIOLENCE ENSUES // CULTURAL INDIGNITY

I don't do a lot of blogging.

Back up. I blog a lot, but it's to people. I like people, and that's 
really what this post is going to be about.

But I don't really write big blocks of text for general consumption 
these days unless they're technical explanations of why something can or 
can't be done along with a couple of jokes and a nice metaphor about a 
rat named Stephen.

And there may be a reason for that.

But collaboration is key. A few weeks or months ago I saw a link in IRC 
or on a blog post or something pointing me to this crazy new website: 
https://chat.meatspac.es. It's this thing where you click on it and 
suddenly there are a bunch of short, looping animated gifs of people 
doing people things alongside lines of text which you can pretty easily 
presume they've written.

And I immediately said 'huh' and closed the tab and didn't think about 
it again. I don't even know that I filed it away under anything under 
than 'seen it,' because I really have no idea how my mental filing 
system works. I think it's probably filled with snakes. Snakes and 
ladders. Both good things to watch out for.

The point is, it wasn't for me right then. I'm saying this now because 
this is really what I'm talking about.

The right people have to hit each other the right way to click. And it 
doesn't always work.

Tonight I read this blog by my new friend @ednapiranha, who created 
chat.meatspace.es. We were already talking about cooperation and 
interaction, but it's a good blog post and you should read it because it 
sets up everything I'm about to say.

http://ednapiranha.com/2013/meatspace-chat-social-constraints/

And since I'm about as good at linear narration as I am at not beginning 
my sentences with 'and,' this takes us to Friday night.

The night before I'd been up way too long being way too depressed and 
way too emotional about way too many things in a way that was way too 
stiff and busted. Friday I woke up and decided I was going out to my 
favorite bar regardless of the terrible traffic and regardless of the 
setting sun. And I did it.

I had two drinks, a shot, and left. Which isn't something I do. I like 
cocktails. I know some great bartenders, and I usually close the bar 
regardless of when I get there.

I go home and fuck around on the internet for a couple of hours. Then my 
friend hep posts this link to her facebook:

http://fomolabs.tumblr.com/post/78183114257/how-meatspace-changed-my-life

And I skimmed it. I didn't read it at first because I didn't have to. It 
pushed a lot of buttons all at once and I didn't really know why.

And that's when I went to chat.meatspace.es for the second time, 
immediately recognized it as something I'd seen before, but also 
immediately discarded that information because it wasn't relevant 
anymore.

First impressions happen every day.

What's really remarkable about human interaction is how good we are at 
completely dismissing huge chunks of information all at once. Every 
single stone of our foundation can be ripped out, all at once or just a 
few, at any given time and replaced with any other thing based on whim. 
We call it epiphany, or inspiration, or learning.

The point is, we're flexible. So, again, First impressions happen every 
day.

When we meet people and then meet them again, later, and realize that 
our impressions are different from the expectations we established when 
we met them the first time, sometimes we struggle with it. Sometimes 
it's no big deal. Sometimes we say things like, "I don't think I really 
knew you then," or, "I guess we've both changed."

Of course you didn't know them then, and of course you've both changed, 
because everything's in motion all the time. It's our expectation that 
it's not going to change that makes us think it's standing still. And we 
do this because we have to, because walking all over a bunch of 
electrons spinning around and trying not to fall through them is the 
removal of every layer of abstraction necessary for us to get through 
the day.

And this isn't just about nuclear forces, remember: It's about people.

We need these layers of abstraction in order to function in society. But 
the apparatus of social abstraction and expectation can be peeled back 
and even crated and stored, disused, when that epiphany, that learning, 
takes place. It's a scaffold, a crutch, a crust that we don't need at 
this critical moment of interaction because we've reached the most 
important idiom of this post: the meat.

Let's talk about cryptography.

The first thing about a secret is that it's shared. This is arguable. I 
guess you could think a secret isn't a secret anymore once it's shared, 
but the idea, the concept that I think of when I hear 'secret' is 
'something others know that I don't' or 'something I know that they 
don't.'

But if it's something you know, something you have inside of you, then 
that's just something inside of you, right? It's not a secret until you 
tell someone. But when you tell yourself, 'that's my secret,' ha ha, 
guess what, you just told yourself. Which, if you think about it, you do 
a lot. You probably just did it again. Now I'm doing it.

So the secret is all about the sharing. It's cooperation. It's 
communication. It's something that has intrinsic and discrete meaning 
for both parties. The meaning might actually be different, but the 
object itself is the same, the token is shared and we're both operating 
off of the same general principle, and when I say potato you know I mean 
potato. The semantic definition of the item results in a shared look 
across the room and a subtle change in expression when someone mentions 
tequila and you and your best friend simultaneously remember the night 
you passed out on each other in the laundry room in a pile of vomit.

There's more information in a secret message than just the message. 
There's a sender, a receiver, and a payload. The payload is what 
everyone thinks is the meaty stuff, but the sender and receiver are 
extremely important, too.

The secret isn't the secret, the secret is the sharing.

So the secret is actually the combination of the sender, the receiver, 
the payload, and the semantic meanings associated with that cooperative 
system.

In the tequila metaphor, the sender and receiver are interchangeable and 
not actually sending or receiving much to or from each other: they're 
being triggered by a payload, offered by a third party, which only has 
semantic meaning to the 'sender' and 'receiver.'

And that's why human relationships are so tricky. Because you and the 
person you're dating aren't two people, you're at minimum three: you, 
them, and the combination of you and them. And then there's you and them 
vs. you, and you and them vs. them, and you vs. you, and them vs. them, 
and them vs. you and them, and turtles. Turtles all the way down.

These are discrete social forces, discrete semantic meanings, discrete 
senders and receivers of various payloads. The parts are practically 
interchangeable in this example, what's important is the interaction. 
The cooperative system.

If I send an email message to someone, in that email message, the 
headers reveal that I'm the one who sent it and they're the one to whom 
it was sent. And on their end, when it's received, it'll say that 
they're the one who received it and I'm the one who sent it.

I need to send a message to someone, but I can't reveal who they are or 
where they are. How do I send it?

Easy. Send it to everyone. Numbers stations, spam email, you name it, if 
you see it then it probably has some manner of semantic meaning to 
someone else that it doesn't have to you. This is how advertising works, 
and it's more complicated than it seems on the surface: the effect an 
advertisement had on the person sitting next to you can change the way 
the advertisement affected you. Turtles again, all the way down. It 
propagates.

Abstraction again. We need it. This is precisely why we need it. Because 
if we were aware of all the stones and ripples and people around us -- 
and that the people around us aren't anything like the people we're 
forced to decide they are -- then we'd go crazy. And a lot of people do 
from time to time. Sometimes it leads to things like being depressed on 
a Friday night and ending up staring at a bunch of faces you don't 
recognize with a couple that you do and a bunch of lines of text next to 
their cycling, short animated images which you presume they've probably 
written.

So there I am, and these people are having a conversation, and I don't 
even know what it's about. But I say hello, and pretty soon we're 
sharing jokes and I'm meeting people and we're sharing music and talking 
about aspirations and ideas we have and projects we're working on and 
sharing stories and encouraging, helping one another with various 
things, offering advice and recommendation.

And by pretty soon I mean more or less instantaneously. Because that's 
the secret of cooperative systems: the right people need to hit the 
right people at the right time or it doesn't click. But it could at any 
time, because first impressions happen every day. We're flexible, and 
epiphany is always around the corner.

And my horrible, horrible weekend turned into one of the most positive 
early mornings that I can recall, with strangers on the internet who 
aren't strangers at all. People came and went and were accepted freely 
and easily on each individual occasion. Information aggregated but 
didn't affect expectation. The ephemeral nature of the method of 
communication lent every individual moment of interaction its own 
semantic meaning, and they don't necessarily need to be assembled 
together or in order to have impact.

Expectation dynamics are ruinous.

A long time ago it occurred to me that people should marry each other as 
soon as they feel that 'click,' because then everything that comes along 
becomes an opportunity instead of an obligation. "The fence is broken." 
"Well, I'm a carpenter." "Oh, hey, how handy." instead of, "The fence is 
broken. Go fix it, you're a carpenter."

It's a huge difference. Huge. Insurmountable, sometimes. And aggregated 
expectations create situations which we can't unravel ourselves from. We 
become aware of the turtles, and we keep adding to the stack.

Let's talk about cryptography.

A quick and dirty explanation of public key cryptography is that you 
have two giant numbers which are related to each other in some 
repeatable fashion and you share one of them with everyone and keep the 
other one private.

So I know my private number, and you know your private number, and we 
both share our public numbers with each other. What this means is that, 
because I know both my public AND my private number, and they're 
mathematically linked, and both of your numbers are also mathematically 
linked, when you send me a message which is linked between your PRIVATE 
key and my PUBLIC key, I'm able to read it with my PRIVATE key linked to 
your PUBLIC key.

Which is a concept I've already expounded upon repeatedly in this post: 
Sender, receiver, payload, semantic meaning. They're all in the system.

Public key cryptography is one of the most widely used encryption 
methods used, period, and you use it every day. Checking your email, 
performing credit card transactions, calling your buddy in Malaysia. You 
can more or less bet absolutely that somewhere in there there's some 
public key cryptography taking place.

And it happens every day in the meat world, too. I know I'm Marc, you 
know you're you. But what Marc means to me and what you mean to you 
aren't what I get when you tell me you're you, and aren't what you get 
when I tell you I'm Marc. We've shared our public keys -- our names, our 
appearances, our dialects, our intonations, whatever -- and included a 
payload -- "How are you today? <request>" "I'm fine <response>" -- and 
used our own private keys, our understandings of ourselves, to interpret 
it into a semantic, understandable message.

You tell me you're fine, I'm reading it through my view of the world. 
Maybe I feel like shit and /I/ said I was fine, so now when you say 
you're fine I'm thinking maybe you feel like shit too. Or maybe I feel 
great and I don't question that you said you're fine.

One of the things that allows public key cryptography to be reliable is 
that those big numbers don't change.

And that's not the nature of people.

Facebook and Twitter are really big things. We can include Google+ in 
this too, if you like -- interesting side note, BGP, which is 
essentially the protocol that makes the internet work, is a hell of a 
lot like Google+ -- but the idea is pretty much the same. These are 
places where you can communicate to a whole lot of people at once a 
specific thing that you want to share. A picture of your family 
vacation, your collection of plush animals stabbed with pens, a video of 
three pieces of bread falling off of a high shelf.

You're selecting the content which is presented and it's being delivered 
to any number of people who can disregard it or interact with it at 
their leisure. If they don't care about it, they don't respond to it. If 
they do care, they respond. Positively or negatively.

Negative responses, well, it's really easy to become hostile very 
quickly on the internet when you can't read a person's intent while 
they're writing this heartfelt explanation of how important badgers are 
to them and the fact that you've posted a picture of a stuffed animal in 
the form of a badger stabbed with a really nice hand-made pen (inlaid 
with blue stone) insults them terribly.

Because if you could see my joking face you'd be like, "asshole," and 
punch me in the arm. But since it's the internet you flare up and tell 
me it's your right to stab animals as you see fit and you didn't hurt 
anyone in doing it and it's your property so you can do what you want, 
and why don't you fuck off you liberal moron.

Whoa.

That escalated quickly. I'd better rethink my plush-stabbing tendencies. 
Or maybe just defriend that person.

Who then posts this gem: "SOME people are just so intolerant..." on 
their Facebook.

I don't see it, because I defriended them because they're a jerk about 
my stabbing.

The point is, and this is well-known by just about everyone, that social 
media -- or at least the emergent form of it -- isn't generally very 
social. It's either an echo chamber or a place for an argument or a 
muttered "meh" which flits off into the rest of your day like dust from 
your eyelash, never to be seen again. Until you need it. Until its 
semiotic meaning pays off.

Until it's dirt.

"Well, you posted in 1999 that you hated ligers, and I like ligers now 
and my friend is a zoologist who works with ligers."

That time you got drunk with your best friend in the laundry room is 
going to be with you forever, but it's the semantic meaning that you're 
keeping, not the blatant fact of it. Not just the payload, but the 
entire cooperative system.

When I dig up that post about ligers, all I'm doing is recalling the 
payload, and now I'm presenting it with my own semantic analysis which 
applies to right now.

First impressions happen every day.

I'm not going to go so far as to say that real life doesn't work like 
that: real life totally works like that and we're always gathering dirt 
on everyone we know because we know that someday it's going to pay off. 
But there's a difference between remembering that time when I loaned you 
ten bucks and seeing it posted on Facebook or Twitter. The difference is 
that I can't go back through a neatly-organized list of reasons to hate 
you, I have to filter it through my own memory and my own semantic 
interpretation first.

I can't just call up a fact at whim and then generate a new, 
now-relevant semantic interpretation about it. I have to filter it 
first, through myself, instead of this reliable third-party who keeps 
everything and knows everything and to which everyone is held as 
standard.

So now we'll talk about ephemeral communication.

I'm paraphrasing a friend here: 1:1 choice-driven communication is a 
dead end for cooperation and growth.

Early Friday morning, when it was really bad, I looked through my list 
of friends on Facebook, and in my phone, and on Google Hangouts, and so 
on. And I thought really hard about reaching out to any of them with all 
of my aggregated semantic knowledge about them stacking up and I reached 
a thing called analysis paralysis, or choice paralysis. It's also called 
overthinking, and it leads to things like not talking to anyone and 
laying in bed staring at your phone all night without actually doing 
anything, and wishing you could just fall asleep so then you won't have 
to live with this for a few hours.

I guess you could call instant messaging or IRC ephemeral communication. 
Except you can click on the log button and save it all as much as you 
want. Every client makes this really easy. It's handy when you're 
working with people on something, or you want to remember that really 
cool link someone sent you about ligers, or when you really wanna dig up 
dirt to sock it to that asshole who told that jokey metaphor about 
Stephen the rat that offended your tender sensibilities.

So no. They're not ephemeral communication at all.

Snapchat is really popular right now. I didn't think much of it when it 
came out. My thought at the time was that we didn't need another instant 
messaging or video chat platform, and that it was stupid that it deletes 
it because why would you want to delete it, and you can use internet 
tricks to save it anyway (which people do, by the way, and they'll 
always do it so just accept it and move on) so why bother.

But that isn't the real problem. It falls into the dilemma of 1:1 
choice-driven communication and perpetuates analysis paralysis and echo 
chambers.

Which means it isn't anything new on the internet.

You can save meatspace gifs. We do it a lot. I know this because I've 
seen it done and I've done it myself. Some people probably use this 
surreptitiously.

I'm willing to bet the people who do so don't participate in the 
community.

This is the difference between using a service which lets you "chat with 
your friends" and interacting with different people that you would never 
have interacted with before. Online dating is broken because you get to 
choose from a list of people who match your traits. That couple who've 
been married for twenty years who work in entirely different industries 
who accidentally bumped into each other at a bar in Reno -- dude, that's 
a movie plot. We no longer consider that sort of thing to be real.

But it happens every day. It happens every day to you all the time. 
Every single moment you are glancing off of every other person around 
you in every way possible through your sensorium and all it takes is for 
both of you to be the right people and it to be the right moment. And a 
lot of the time that doesn't happen.

I can guarantee you it's not likely to happen on Facebook or Snapchat or 
Twitter. Sure, it does sometimes -- one of the people in meatspace was 
someone I'd interacted with tangentially on Facebook whom I already knew 
I appreciated.

And then you take a medium like meatspace.

Let's talk about it.

It's a website with a bunch of looping, short gifs of webcams on one 
side, and things that the people in the gifs probably wrote on the other 
side. There's scrollback, but pretty quickly the messages scroll off and 
you can't get back to them.

You kinda have to be there to be there.

When I tell you something I get to see your response to it. You lift a 
glass, you wave a hand. You smile. You make a disgusted face.

So how is this different from video chat? Why is it different from 
chatroulette?

Because you don't have to sit there watching me not do anything for the 
thirty seconds between the things we say. Because you don't have to 
listen to me sneezing.

Because the only things we're offering to each other are tiny moments of 
half-intentional, half-accidental, ephemeral chemistry with little to no 
threat of retribution or lasting impact. Yeah, I'll carry that moment 
with me, but it's gonna be my semantic moment, not the one on 
Livejournal about ligers.

Last night I made a bunch of new friends whom I'd get drunk with in the 
laundry room with no hesitation.

This is what's missing from the internet and we need to explore it 
further. We need to find the meat in the metal. I've got some ideas.

I'll bet you do too.

Let's meatspace about them sometime.
